*This project has been created as part of the 42 curriculum by ibady.*

# ==== 🎶 CALL ME MAYBE 🎶 ====

## Table of contents

  1. [Description](#description)
  2. [Instructions](#instructions)
  3. [Resources](#resources)
  4. [Algorithm explanation](#algorithm-explanation)
  5. [Design decisions](#design-decisions)
  6. [Performance analysis](#performance-analysis)
  7. [Challenges faced](#challenges-faced)
  8. [Testing strategy](#testing-strategy)
  9. [Example usage](#example-usage)<br><br>


### Description


___

This project has for goal to learn how to use small language models, such as Qwen 0.6B, 
to generate correct answers to a user prompt following a specific format.<br>
To summarize, the model is given the prompt (ex: "Add 2 and 3"), and instead of giving the answer directly (ex: "2 + 3 makes 5"), it has to give the corresponding function selected from a list of functions definition with its parameters (ex: "name: fn_add_numbers, parameters: {a: 2, b: 3}").<br>
To do so, trusting blindly the model isn't the solution for correct generation because those models are not very advanced.<br>
That is why constraint decoding is needed to achieve passable results.<br>
Constraint decoding means verifying at each generation step the tokens generated by the model and selecting the appropriate ones.<br>


### Instructions


___

**Execution:**<br>

+ Makefile rules:<br><br>
``make`` -> runs uv sync and starts the program<br>
``make install`` -> runs uv sync<br>
``make run`` -> starts the program<br>
``make clean`` -> cleans the __mypycache__ files<br>
``make fclean`` -> cleans then removes the virtual environment<br>
``make re`` -> make fclean then make<br>
``make reset`` -> destroys the uv.lock file then rebuilds<br>
``make lint`` -> checks mypy and flake8 errors<br>
``make lint-strict`` -> checks mypy --strict and flake8 errors<br>
``make help`` -> lists all available rules and their usage<br><br>
You can also run the program with ``uv run python -m src``.<br><br>

+ Optional flags:<br><br>
If you wish to specify paths for the input files or output file, here are the options:<br><br>
-> You can run directly the program using the "--" flags:<br>
  ``uv run python -m src 
  [--input <path to the file with the prompts>] 
  [--functions_definition <path to the file with the functions' definition>] 
  [--output <path to the file where the output should be>]``<br><br>
-> You can define the Makefile variables on the command line:<br>
  ``make run 
  FUNCTIONS="<path to the functions's definition file>"
  INPUT="<path to the prompt file>"
  OUTPUT="<path to the output file>"``<br>

  Another optional flag (``--verbose <True/False>``) is also available should you wish to have an output log during the generation.<br>

### Resources


___

**Links:**<br>
- [Constraint decoding explanation](https://www.aidancooper.co.uk/constrained-decoding/)<br>
- [Small language models introduction](https://huggingface.co/blog/jjokah/small-language-model)<br><br>

**AI Usage:**<br>
I used Claude to explain some notions about prompts and regexes.<br><br>

### Algorithm explanation


___

For constraint decoding, I generate the response in two separate functions.<br><br>
The first generates the function name : for each token that the model generates, I check that it matches or partially matches one of the function names.<br>
If it doesn't, I make the model generate new tokens, and if it does, I add the token chosen to the end of the prompt and continue.<br><br>
The second function generates a single parameter and works the same way, 
except that the tokens generated match a specific regex given as argument based on the type of the parameter to generate.<br>
The prompt for this second function also includes the function name and description, aswell as the parameters already generated if the function has several.<br><br>

### Design decisions


___

I made the choice to only generate the function name and the parameters' values using the model.<br>
Which means that it doesn't generate JSON output directly, but I use the results to write following JSON formatting in a file.<br>
I also don't modify directly the logits of a token to -inf, I just continue generating until a token corresponds.<br><br>

### Performance analysis


___

I would say that there are more efficient ways to generate tokens (especially by changing the logits), 
but it doesn't really reflect on the speed of the program.<br>
Similarly, the constraint decoding I chose using regexes could be more strict or more complex, 
but I have found that small models like Qwen 0.6B don't really need complex instructions because they are not advanced enough to handle them.<br>
Since I don't rely on the model to generate the entire JSON file, I reliably have valid output files.<br><br>

### Challenges faced


___

I had a bit of a hard time at first comprehending how language models worked, having no previous experience in this domain.<br>
And good prompting also proved to be a challenge as a small change can result in vast differences in what the model generates.<br><br>

### Testing strategy


___

I tested with all the original files provided aswell as custom prompts and functions' definitions, and some edge cases.<br>
I also modified the input files to test parsing reliability, and passed all the flags to the program to verify path flexibility.<br><br>

### Example usage


___

+ Functions definition file example:<br><br>

```json
  {
    "name": "fn_add_numbers",
    "description": "Add two numbers together and return their sum.",
    "parameters": {
      "a": {
        "type": "number"
      },
      "b": {
        "type": "number"
      }
    },
    "returns": {
      "type": "number"
    }
  },
```
<br>

+ Input prompts file example:<br><br>

```json
  {
    "prompt": "Greet big fihhh"
  },
  {
    "prompt": "Reverse the string 'hello'"
  },
  {
    "prompt": "Reverse the string 'world'"
  },
  {
    "prompt": "What is the square root of 16?"
  },
  {
    "prompt": "Add the numbers four and eighty-eight"
  },
```
<br>

+ Output file example:<br><br>

```json
  {
    "prompt": "Add the numbers four and eighty-eight",
    "name": "fn_add_numbers",
    "parameters": {
        "a": 4.0,
        "b": 88.0
    }
  },
```
<br>
